Enter two Sentinels-[first,] Francisco, [who paces up and down at his post; then] Bernardo, [who approaches him].

Bernardo. Who's there?
Francisco. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Bernardo. Long live the King!
Francisco. Bernardo?5
Bernardo. He.
Francisco. You come most carefully upon your hour.
Bernardo. 'Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.
Francisco. For this relief much thanks. 'Tis bitter cold,
And I am sick at heart.10
Bernardo. Have you had quiet guard?
Francisco. Not a mouse stirring.
Bernardo. Well, good night.
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.15
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.

Francisco. I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
Horatio. Friends to this ground.
Marcellus. And liegemen to the Dane.
Francisco. Give you good night.20
Marcellus. O, farewell, honest soldier.
Who hath reliev'd you?
Francisco. Bernardo hath my place.
Give you good night. Exit.
Marcellus. Holla, Bernardo!25
Bernardo. Say-
What, is Horatio there ?
Horatio. A piece of him.
Bernardo. Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.
Marcellus. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?30
Bernardo. I have seen nothing.
Marcellus. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
And will not let belief take hold of him
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore I have entreated him along,35
With us to watch the minutes of this night,
That, if again this apparition come,
He may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Horatio. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Bernardo. Sit down awhile,40
And let us once again assail your ears,
That are so fortified against our story,
What we two nights have seen.
Horatio. Well, sit we down,
And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.45
Bernardo. Last night of all,
When yond same star that's westward from the pole
Had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
The bell then beating one-50
Enter Ghost.

Marcellus. Peace! break thee off! Look where it comes again!
Bernardo. In the same figure, like the King that's dead.
Marcellus. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.
Bernardo. Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.55
Horatio. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Bernardo. It would be spoke to.
Marcellus. Question it, Horatio.
Horatio. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
Together with that fair and warlike form60
In which the majesty of buried Denmark
Did sometimes march? By heaven I charge thee speak!
Marcellus. It is offended.
Bernardo. See, it stalks away!
Horatio. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!65
Exit Ghost.

Marcellus. 'Tis gone and will not answer.
Bernardo. How now, Horatio? You tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on't?70
Horatio. Before my God, I might not this believe
Without the sensible and true avouch
Of mine own eyes.
Marcellus. Is it not like the King?
Horatio. As thou art to thyself.75
Such was the very armour he had on
When he th' ambitious Norway combated.
So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
'Tis strange.80
Marcellus. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
Horatio. In what particular thought to work I know not;
But, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
This bodes some strange eruption to our state.85
Marcellus. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
Why this same strict and most observant watch
So nightly toils the subject of the land,
And why such daily cast of brazen cannon
And foreign mart for implements of war;90
Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
Does not divide the Sunday from the week.
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
Who is't that can inform me?95
Horatio. That can I.
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,100
Dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet
(For so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
Did slay this Fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
Well ratified by law and heraldry,
Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands105
Which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
Against the which a moiety competent
Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same cov'nant110
And carriage of the article design'd,
His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,
Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,115
For food and diet, to some enterprise
That hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
As it doth well appear unto our state,
But to recover of us, by strong hand
And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands120
So by his father lost; and this, I take it,
Is the main motive of our preparations,
The source of this our watch, and the chief head
Of this post-haste and romage in the land.
Bernardo. I think it be no other but e'en so.125
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
Comes armed through our watch, so like the King
That was and is the question of these wars.
Horatio. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of Rome,130
A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
The graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;
As stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
Disasters in the sun; and the moist star135
Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
As harbingers preceding still the fates
And prologue to the omen coming on,140
Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
Unto our climature and countrymen.
[Enter Ghost again.]
But soft! behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it, though it blast me.- Stay illusion!145
[Spreads his arms.]
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
Speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done,
That may to thee do ease, and, grace to me,150
Speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
Which happily foreknowing may avoid,
O, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life155
Extorted treasure in the womb of earth
(For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
[The cock crows.]
Speak of it! Stay, and speak!- Stop it, Marcellus!
Marcellus. Shall I strike at it with my partisan?160
Horatio. Do, if it will not stand.
Bernardo. 'Tis here!
Horatio. 'Tis here!
Marcellus. 'Tis gone!
[Exit Ghost.]165
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
To offer it the show of violence;
For it is as the air, invulnerable,
And our vain blows malicious mockery.
Bernardo. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.170
Horatio. And then it started, like a guilty thing
Upon a fearful summons. I have heard
The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
Awake the god of day; and at his warning,175
Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
Th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
To his confine; and of the truth herein
This present object made probation.
Marcellus. It faded on the crowing of the cock.180
Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
The bird of dawning singeth all night long;
And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,185
No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
Horatio. So have I heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.190
Break we our watch up; and by my advice
Let us impart what we have seen to-night
Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,195
As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
Where we shall find him most conveniently.
Exeunt.
Claudius. Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
The memory be green, and that it us befitted
To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
To be contracted in one brow of woe,
Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature205
That we with wisest sorrow think on him
Together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,210
With an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
In equal scale weighing delight and dole,
Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone215
With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,220
Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
He hath not fail'd to pester us with message
Importing the surrender of those lands
Lost by his father, with all bands of law,
To our most valiant brother. So much for him.225
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,
Who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
Of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress230
His further gait herein, in that the levies,
The lists, and full proportions are all made
Out of his subject; and we here dispatch
You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,
For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,235
Giving to you no further personal power
To business with the King, more than the scope
Of these dilated articles allow. [Gives a paper.]
Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Cornelius. [with Voltemand] In that, and all things, will we show our duty.240
Claudius. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
[Exeunt Voltemand and Cornelius.]
And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is't, Laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the Dane245
And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.250
What wouldst thou have, Laertes?
Laertes. My dread lord,
Your leave and favour to return to France;
From whence though willingly I came to Denmark
To show my duty in your coronation,255
Yet now I must confess, that duty done,
My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
Claudius. Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?
Polonius. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave260
By laboursome petition, and at last
Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Claudius. Take thy fair hour, Laertes. Time be thine,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will!265
But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son-
Hamlet. [aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind!
Claudius. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Hamlet. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
Gertrude. Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,270
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.275
Hamlet. Ay, madam, it is common.
Gertrude. If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?
Hamlet. Seems, madam, Nay, it is. I know not 'seems.'
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,280
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,285
'That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
For they are actions that a man might play;
But I have that within which passeth show-
These but the trappings and the suits of woe.
Claudius. 'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,290
To give these mourning duties to your father;
But you must know, your father lost a father;
That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
In filial obligation for some term
To do obsequious sorrow. But to persever295
In obstinate condolement is a course
Of impious stubbornness. 'Tis unmanly grief;
It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
An understanding simple and unschool'd;300
For what we know must be, and is as common
As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
Why should we in our peevish opposition
Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,305
To reason most absurd, whose common theme
Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
From the first corse till he that died to-day,
'This must be so.' We pray you throw to earth
This unprevailing woe, and think of us310
As of a father; for let the world take note
You are the most immediate to our throne,
And with no less nobility of love
Than that which dearest father bears his son
Do I impart toward you. For your intent315
In going back to school in Wittenberg,
It is most retrograde to our desire;
And we beseech you, bend you to remain
Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.320
Gertrude. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.
I pray thee stay with us, go not to Wittenberg.
Hamlet. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Claudius. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come.325
This gentle and unforc'd accord of Hamlet
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day
But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
And the King's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,330
Respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Flourish. Exeunt all but Hamlet.

Hamlet. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd335
His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on't! ah, fie! 'Tis an unweeded garden
That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature340
Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven345
Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
Must I remember? Why, she would hang on him
As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
Let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman!-350
A little month, or ere those shoes were old
With which she followed my poor father's body
Like Niobe, all tears- why she, even she
(O God! a beast that wants discourse of reason
Would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;355
My father's brother, but no more like my father
Than I to Hercules. Within a month,
Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
She married. O, most wicked speed, to post360
With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for I must hold my tongue!
Enter Horatio, Marcellus, and Bernardo.

Horatio. Hail to your lordship!365
Hamlet. I am glad to see you well.
Horatio!- or I do forget myself.
Horatio. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Hamlet. Sir, my good friend- I'll change that name with you.
And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?370
Marcellus?
Marcellus. My good lord!
Hamlet. I am very glad to see you.- [To Bernardo] Good even, sir.-
But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?
Horatio. A truant disposition, good my lord.375
Hamlet. I would not hear your enemy say so,
Nor shall you do my ear that violence
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsinore?380
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
Horatio. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.
Hamlet. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Horatio. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.385
Hamlet. Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
My father- methinks I see my father.390
Horatio. O, where, my lord?
Hamlet. In my mind's eye, Horatio.
Horatio. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
Hamlet. He was a man, take him for all in all.
I shall not look upon his like again.395
Horatio. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.
Hamlet. Saw? who?
Horatio. My lord, the King your father.
Hamlet. The King my father?
Horatio. Season your admiration for a while400
With an attent ear, till I may deliver
Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
This marvel to you.
Hamlet. For God's love let me hear!
Horatio. Two nights together had these gentlemen405
(Marcellus and Bernardo) on their watch
In the dead vast and middle of the night
Been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
Appears before them and with solemn march410
Goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
Within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd
Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me415
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch;
Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
The apparition comes. I knew your father.420
These hands are not more like.
Hamlet. But where was this?
Marcellus. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
Hamlet. Did you not speak to it?
Horatio. My lord, I did;425
But answer made it none. Yet once methought
It lifted up it head and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And at the sound it shrunk in haste away430
And vanish'd from our sight.
Hamlet. 'Tis very strange.
Horatio. As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.435
Hamlet. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to-night?
Marcellus. [with Bernardo] We do, my lord.
Hamlet. Arm'd, say you?
Marcellus. [with Bernardo] Arm'd, my lord.440
Hamlet. From top to toe?
Marcellus. [with Bernardo] My lord, from head to foot.
Hamlet. Then saw you not his face?
Horatio. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
Hamlet. What, look'd he frowningly.445
Horatio. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Hamlet. Pale or red?
Horatio. Nay, very pale.
Hamlet. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
Horatio. Most constantly.450
Hamlet. I would I had been there.
Horatio. It would have much amaz'd you.
Hamlet. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?
Horatio. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
Marcellus. [with Bernardo] Longer, longer.455
Horatio. Not when I saw't.
Hamlet. His beard was grizzled- no?
Horatio. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A sable silver'd.
Hamlet. I will watch to-night.460
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Horatio. I warr'nt it will.
Hamlet. If it assume my noble father's person,
I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,465
If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
Let it be tenable in your silence still;
And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.470
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I'll visit you.
All. Our duty to your honour.
Hamlet. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
[Exeunt [all but Hamlet].]475
My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Exit.

Laertes. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
But let me hear from you.485
Ophelia. Do you doubt that?
Laertes. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
Hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
A violet in the youth of primy nature,
Forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;490
The perfume and suppliance of a minute;
No more.
Ophelia. No more but so?
Laertes. Think it no more.
For nature crescent does not grow alone495
